High in this video we're going to look at something called single dispatch generic functions.
So before I get to that let me just talk about overloading of functions.
If you come from a traditional object or a programming background you know what overloading is.
It basically allows us to define functions with the same name but as long as they have a different signature
which is basically the types of the parameters or the number of parameters of the function.
So as long as you could distinguish between the different functions based on the types and the number
of parameters you can essentially create the same name for the function you're overloading the function.
And then when you call the function the compiler or the interpreter will figure out which one you meant.
That's called overloading.
Now we don't have that in Python and if you think about it it makes sense that we don't have it.
We don't have typing We don't have static typing in Python.
So what happens is that we don't declare a variable as being of a specific type which means we don't
have you know a method signature.
We don't have a function signature really.
Now maybe you could do it based on the number of arguments so you could differentiate two functions
with the same name but different arguments.
Well maybe but then you get into problems when you have variable positional arguments and Verum not
a variable number of keyword arguments.
So it just gets ugly.
So we don't have overloading it in Python.
So instead we can do something called single dispatch.
Generic functions which allows us to do something similar but based on the type of the first argument.
Now if you want to do multiple arguments and that's called multiday dispatch I'm not going to get into
that.
I'm just going to look at single dispatch.
So let's take a look at that and lift up building up a use case where we might want to use this.
So in this example I'm going to use a function we want a function that we can use to format H.T. M-L
data.
So for example we want to be able to format strain's who are able to format integers and floats in different
ways in each table and lists for example and dictionaries and things like that.
We have a list we want to emit you know an unordered list with both items.
We have a dictionary we want the same thing but with the key value pairs integers we're going to want
to print out the integers as well as maybe the hexadecimal value of floats will just want to keep it
to two decimal points.
Our strings will want to make sure that you know we H.T. escape the string and then we replace any new
lines with B.R. tags.
Things like that.
So let's get started.
It's actually pretty straightforward.
Our get started let's do this.
So from him import cascade.
So this is just a function we're going to use to do h t m l escaping of strings.
So that's going to be pretty handy.
We don't have to write that ourselves so let's write the function called to melt the escape.
So it really doesn't do anything other than just string of phi the argument whatever the argument is.
So any arbitrary objects trying to apply it and then escape it and return that.
So very straightforward.
Now let's work on the integers.
So let's say we have you know we want to our age to mollify.
I can use that are some integer 8.
So we're going to return.
And let's go ahead and do it this way.
So we'll return the integer itself and then in italics we will return the hexadecimal version of the
numbers.
So I make sure I've got that right.
Yes.
Looks good.
And multi-format on a while we want a.
And then we want the string up the hexadecimal representation.
OK.
All right.
So that's all integers.
Now let's do the real numbers.
So let's say def h t out real.
And here what we want to do is just limited to two decimal points.
So when are we turn 0 and we'll say two decimals or two digits after the decimal point doffed format.
And now we're going to round up the number 2 digits after the decimal point.
So that's how we're going to do the reals.
That's pretty straightforward.
Let's do the string as well.
The string is going to be quite easy as well.
Actually they're all easy.
All right so I asked him escape.
It's not replace.
And we're going to replace.
So first we escape the string and then we replace any new line character with a B are tagged and I'll
use that and I'll keep the newline character as well so that when we printed out that said of the Standard
out it will look a little neater
and we have the lists for how we're going to handle this.
Well first thing is we're going to build the items up in the list.
So we're going to write a generator expression or if you want to know if you wanted to do a list expression
you could do that you could do a loop but it's more pythonic to use these generator or list expression
comprehensions I should say no expressions.
But I'm going to use a generator here which is similar I know we haven't covered that yet.
So we're going to build up our items in list items.
OK.
And we want to format and we want an HMO is keep the items.
So to see what's going on here let me bring this on the next line.
We are going to take every item
in the list.
So for every item in the list we're going to generate this string over here and which we are going to
H.T. about escape the items because they could be strings themselves and we want to make sure that we're
handling that correctly.
Now that's not entirely going that's not going to do entirely what we're looking for but we'll come
back to it.
And then at the end we want to return that concatenation of all the items but wrapped in you else.
So we're going to start by probably put a u l k.
That's the first thing.
And to keep it again need when we print it out I'm going to add a carriage return or a new line then
I'm going to use the joint function on the string.
So I'm going to join the items.
OK.
So this is a way I can concatenate all the strings.
You could do it using a loop but don't don't do it.
Don't use a loop to concatenate strings.
First of all you're doing applause which means that you're going to be creating a new string every time.
OK so it's not as efficient and joined as just a better way of doing it.
And then we're going to end with again a new line.
Do we need a new line here.
We have we're not putting any new lines in these in the items we could.
We could put a new line in the items I guess.
I'm not actually sorry we are putting the new the new line in front case so we need to add another new
line here and there we go.
It doesn't really matter.
The new lines is just for making it look nice.
OK so that's our basic way of handling a list.
And for the dictionary it's going to be very similar.
So let's call it h t m l dict.
We're going to pass a dictionary deal let's say.
And again we're going to do a generator.
And we're going to do the same thing we're going to have are items that we're going to put in except
what items are going to be key value pairs.
So we need to put the key value pairs.
Format.
And we're going to say format K comma V fall onto the thin the dot items.
OK so we're going to iterate through top holds which will consist of the key values that's what items
does it allows us to basically retrieve iterate through the key value pairs as topples back to Stupples
of a dictionary and we unpack them into K and V and then we can use K and v is the key and value of
the dictionary item in the formatting of the string.
OK.
So we have that piece and then we need to just return our lists.
We're going to do the same thing that we did our you know list because now this is the items.
So this is a sequence of items.
So again we're just going to pack them around we're going to use the joyn method.
So join items class and we close off the list.
So there we go.
Now of course this isn't complete.
I should really be checking for.
You know maybe none being passed in for some of these things I should be checking that thing all the
types are correct.
You know so there's there's a lot of things that we should be checking.
I'm just trying to keep it very simple here to show you how we can implement single dispatch.
And then of course I'll show you how we don't have to do it ourselves because this big python you know
bad was built in.
And has it as well but I want to show you how we go about writing this so that if you want to be able
to modify this or maybe do multi dispatch then you at least have a starting point.
So let's let's use this let's say we say print and let's frame h t M-L that string of some thing and
let's do a multi-line string just to see.
So this is because I want these carriage returns and they're a multi line string with special characters
that say 10 is less than 100.
Zino that's considered really a special characters.
The less they're.
So if we run those as you can see we have B.R. tags where we had the new lines.
Now we still have the new line.
That's why it's still printing with three lines that's why I kept that new line in.
And then with special characters you can see the less that was encoded with HD encoded to ampersand
L.T. semi-coma.
We can also do the same thing we can say age T.M. in let's say 255.
And as you can see we get to 55 and then in parentheses in tags we get the hex equivalent of that number.
We can also maybe look at something that we haven't defined.
So print HVM out escape.
Let's go ahead and print a complex number right.
We don't have anything for a complex numbers so we're going to use this just base kind of default and
you know of scape which is just going to escape whatever it can.
And so as you can see here what comes back in is just these you know parentheses 10:03 J.
So it's able to escape things that aren't specific like in real string list and Dick that we haven't
specifically handled.
We'll just use the plain escape to do the other ones.
So first thing I'm going to want to do is because I want to I want to support decimals as well as floats.
I'm going to say from decimal import decimal to just to play around with this.
OK so let's write this dispatcher Let's write this function that will take one argument and it's going
to decide which one of these in you know specific functions to call.
So let's go ahead and let's call it H.T. analyze.
It will take a single argument let's call it along.
And what is it going to do.
Well it's going to check.
Basically the type of the argument.
So it's going to have to do a bunch of statements.
So if is instance you can see if it's an integer instance then we're going to return h t m l and.
Now the one thing I want to point out is I'm writing all this again.
This isn't the best way of doing this because here I'm only checking for integers but we have other
integral number types like a Boolean for example with integral number type.
And we'll see the same thing for example with lists right.
A list is a sequence and we have something to handle a list.
Write this thing over here.
But if you look at the way this is written it really could be used for a couple as well.
And in fact it could be used for any sequence type and this can be used for any mapping type it's not
just the dict.
We also have things like all date and default.
So you know these are more generic than just you know a list or a dictionary addict.
But this is what we're looking at.
We're going to be you know using an instance of Dick and list.
And so really we should be using something a little more generic these are called abstract base classes.
We haven't covered that yet so I'm really not going to do too much with it.
I'll show you later on in this video where we might use it.
But for now I'm going to stick just with these plain types that you know these built in types.
But really we should be using abstract base classes and if you don't know what those are in python that's
OK.
If you come from an object or a programming background you can think of those as interfaces so you can
think of abstract base classes as interfaces and interfaces you know could be for example we have an
interface sequenced types so we could use that in the instance instead of using list and tuples specifically
as we're going to have to do here.
But we haven't covered that yet.
OK.
So if the argument is an integer we're going to call aged him ELINT else if is for instance.
Comma float.
And I also want to handle the decimal.
So I'm going to have to do it this way.
OK.
So if it's either a float or a decimal then we're going to return him out real quick.
Alsip where do we have to do so.
Well we have these strings.
So let's do the string and we're going to return on h t m l string of the argument K.
What else.
L If is instance a comma a list but list top all can be handled the same way.
So I'm going to have to do this as well if instance comma top hole will return h t e mail list out the
arguments and L if is instance contradict that say the dictionary is going to return h t m l out of
the argument k.
And if the argument is none of those it's some other object some other type then we're just going to
use a default of h t M-L what did we call h t m l escape the argument.
So that's our dispatchers.
Essentially we can now call HVM allies on let's say 100.
It will know what to do.
Each team relies on a string of let's say Python
rocks.
And as you can see it knows which function to call because it's looking at the type of the argument
being passed in.
So this is a dispatcher sensuous dispatch function.
The problem and there's a number of problems here.
One is in our code itself and the other one is in how we're approaching this.
So first of all in our code let's take a look at this.
We have HVM allies.
Let's go ahead and aist him allies a plane list.
Let's say one two three get.
That works just fine.
And if I print it so we can actually see the kind of hide lays out.
Kate we have our unordered list and our list items.
So that works fine.
But let's go ahead and let's print him allies and I'm going to do a list.
But my the first thing in my list is going to be a multi-line string let's say.
So it's going to be Python rocks.
And then the second item of my list is going to be a tuple let's say 10 20 30 kids were free three integers
and maybe the fourth item in my list is going to be just a plain integer that say 100 k.
So I've got a list with three items a multi-line string a tuple of three integers in it and then just
an integer.
And let's see how it actually creates this.
Well here we have our unordered list for the order list.
That's good.
Then we have list item.
Python rocks.
Now you'll notice that we're not seeing the beyond tag.
So it looks like something's missing.
In fact Python rocks and let's say that 0 is less than 1 cube.
You'll notice that it escaped it.
So that's that's good but we're missing that be all.
There's something going on.
Well to something going on is that this is inside the list.
Right.
And if you look at the tuple that wasn't written out as a list either.
And if you look at the integer that wasn't you know Tim L5 didn't get the integer and the hex value
for it.
So what's happening is that when it's running.
H tim mail list look at what it's doing the email list is simply escaping the item.
It's not h tim Eliza the item.
Right because it doesn't know.
Right.
So here's what's nice now is that we have the aged Himalayans so we can fix this by essentially fixing
this thing here by putting HDMI lies instead of HDMI escape then that should fix it.
But at this point you should be thinking hold on there's a circular kind of reference here.
I mean it's we've already created H.T. a mail list cabe.
And we have this Tim allys property of functions sorry that was defined after we defined age to a mail
list and now we're going back in and changing this to H-2 allies what has been defined after.
Well it's OK.
In Python you can reference a function you can call a function in the body of a function before that
function has been defined as long as the function is defined by the time you call the function.
What I mean by this very simply is that I can have a function.
Def funk one let's say.
And all it does it calls funk to play.
This is perfectly legal.
I haven't defined phunk two yet.
9:5 code func one.
Yeah I've got an issue right.
Because form is not defined but as long as I have defined function to before I mean to say print arm.
So as long as I define function to before I call function one I can define function one that calls function
too.
But rooma doesn't actually execute phunk want to like call it.
Now if I call func one everything's OK because at that time form two was defined.
So that's what I mean.
So we don't really have a circular reference.
So what we can do if you don't believe me I'm going to take this code over here and I'm going to reset
my kernel so I'm going to go kernel and I'm going to say restocks.
OK.
So restocks what this means by the way is that I've lost everything that I've done so far.
OK so I don't have my my impuls so I'm going to have to re-import those things so I'm going to say from
decimal import decimal from page T.M. impled scape those were the only two that we had.
Then I'm going to copy paste this thing here.
HVM allies function came out dispatchers can execute it has been created.
I can't call it right.
I can say H-2A implies it say 100 because it's going to tell me you can't because it's too mail it doesn't
exist.
But that's OK.
Now we're going to take this code over here.
And we're going to copy paste that in.
OK.
So let's go ahead and do that.
And now we can h to mollify.
Let's say 100 and I'm going to spell it correctly or H.T. mollifies is not defined as Tim Alais.
Sorry.
OK.
So that's working correctly.
And so you'll notice that it's perfectly fine to reference a function that hasn't been defined yet.
As long as we as long as we have the function defined before we call it.
OK.
So now with that in mind let's go ahead and fix that problem that we had where we're calling H2 in this
case.
What we really want to do here is to call HD Annelise on that.
OK.
Now the value I just noticed here I should have done also DeMello escape.
Of the value
but I didn't.
So what let's go ahead and do Tim allies of the value and might as well Tim allies K as well.
Actually you know the key we don't want to age implies I may want to feed him lies the value.
The key I'm just going to basically HVM escape it in case there's some special character in there or
something funky going on but I really don't want to fight him like that in full OK.
So because of the keys of Toppo I don't want to have the key and it's going to look very weird.
So that should do it.
And now if we go back to this example that we had over here I'm just going to copy paste it.
That should hopefully work.
And so as we can see we have our out a list.
We have a list the first item was a multi-line string.
We have a B tags that's back.
We can see that the integer was formatted correctly and we can see that our second item which was a
tuple correctly again got rendered as a list.
We have the unordered list and then the each individual list item.
So great.
So that's working just fine.
OK so we solve the first problem.
Now the second problem is more fundamental.
The second problem really is in terms of how we are writing code.
And if you look at this what's happening is that if we want to register a new type Let's say we want
to you know now start implementing something for sets.
Right.
Then we'd have to go here.
And we have to say to himself set came up and really I wouldn't need to implement said I could actually
run a set through the list because you can iterate through a set in the same way.
But I'm just trying to make a point if I wanted to make a you know a new type that's as good a custom
object and I need to be able to go in and say well here's how you should try to mollify this custom
object in this case I'm just going to use the built in set and I'm just going to take this actually.
I'm going to return to a mail list of Aag.
OK so now I've got this h team l cert and here I'm going to have to go in and say l if is instance of
commerce service return HTB all set up.
OK so now we have the set done.
Now I can say to mollify a set.
One two three.
And it's Tim allies.
All right.
And again we get our list.
So the issue is not that we had to write this function.
That's OK.
The issue is that every time we want to register a new type we want to handle a new type.
We have to go in and just keep increasing this ugly looking if an else.
So this is really not a good approach.
First of all it means that we have to keep going back to this function and we have to go and tell it
OK.
You know add this here now add this is instant onset.
And here's the function you call it would be much better if we could somehow from outside just register
and say hey you know for the HVM Elyse if you from outside the body of the function be able to say here's
a new function that should be associated with this type.
In other words we want to maintain We would like to analyze to maintain maybe a dictionary of the type
and the function that it should call and that function can live outside of age implies.
Right.
Just as these functions are living outside of age he implies it implies just needs to know which one
to call for which type.
Right.
And so instead of using this whole horrible if else if and else we could maybe use a dictionary and
we could put that in the dictionary.
So let's take that as a false step to cleaning this up a little bit.
So let's create this function let's recreate caged him alive.
It takes an argument and this is code that I'm going to throw away I'm actually going to do it this
way.
But let's see what we want to do.
We want to take this right.
The idea is we want to be able to do something like this.
We want to create it instead of all these if else statements.
I'm going to create some kind of registry that's going to be a dictionary.
OK.
And in that dictionary I'm going to put in some key and then use I'm going to put in and I'm going to
put in the type X now I'm going to start with object object is going to be the default.
Everything is an object.
So if I don't have something specific for a type then I'm going to use whatever's you know associated
with the object.
So it will make object the key and then the value is going to be the function which should be called.
So this one would be extremely escape.
And then I'm going to do the same thing with centum and say inte and this should be HTL male and and
we can do the same thing with float which is going to be h t m l can't and we have to do the same thing
with decimal which is h t a male.
And again we should really be using an abstract base classes which float.
What do we need.
We need string k so we need to h l string words do we need we need a list which is going to be h t m
l list.
We need a tuple which is going to be mail list.
We need a set that's going to be aged him female set and then we need a dict that's going to be m l
Dick.
And again you know for things like list tuples we should be using abstract base classes.
I'm not going to get into that right away.
I'll show you how to do it but I'm not really going to discuss it much.
OK so now we have this registry that has all the functions that we had over here.
Right.
And then the default is going to be object which is an ABH team I'll escape.
So instead of all this we can get rid of all that.
And what do we want to do.
Well now we want to look at the the instance.
Right.
So we're going to look at the instance of the argument and decide which one of these are we going to
use.
So the way we're going to do this is to look at the type of the argument and see if it's in the registry.
Again this is going to be you know there's a better way of doing this.
But let me go ahead and do this.
So the function is going to be I'm going to look up in the registry.
I'm going to look up the type of the argument and then I'm going to do this default.
So the
registry does get sorry.
So when I'm getting the key out of the dictionary registry if it doesn't exist if it's not found it
will then return this instead.
So that's my default right.
That's the default item that I want to get if I can't find this.
Now of course the problem is that using this kind of approach if my argument let's say is not a list
but is something that's inheriting from a list.
Right.
So we it's a the argument is a subclass of list.
This isn't going to work.
So it needs to become more complicated than this but I'm not going to get into it because it really
does get complicated and we don't actually have to implement all this ourselves.
But I want to show you how you might go about it.
So here you have to be you know a little more clever about how we're going to look up the type of this
argument in the dictionary OK.
So now we have the function right.
We have a basically the function.
So the argument was a string.
Then we looked up string in here and we got him staring back.
That's what's in function.
So now what do I need to do.
I just need to return I need to call the function and return that.
That's all I need to do.
So let's go ahead and try and signifie HVM allies a 100 you'll notice that it worked.
And if h tim allies let's say a list 1 2 3 it's printed.
So we keep the formatting.
OK I get my list.
So that's kind of the idea that we want to build towards.
So that's the first thing is we eliminate those These f n l ifs and we really did it by using a dictionary
that contained the type and the function that we want associated with that type.
And then we just look up the type in the dictionary and execute call the corresponding function.
But we still have this problem where we are basically we basically have to go back if we want to add
something and modify the dictionary.
So instead I want to be able to add to this dictionary from the outside world.
I want to be able to add to that dictionary of HVM allies but without having to go back and change the
code Rached Himalayas.
So hopefully you're thinking right now closures and decorator's because that's exactly how we're going
to approach it.
Right.
If we had a closure here that reference I had a free variable of registry maybe there's a way that they
can return the closure and set up just the function aged him allies always decorated him lies in such
a way that we can so call him allies.
But we also have a way to inject a new item into the registry dictionary.
So if we can do that then we'll have a way of modifying this registry from outside the to minimise function.
So we'll take a look at that next.
And this is a good starting point for the videos trying to get along so I'll stop here and we'll continue
this in the next video.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in a bit.